Hi. I'm going to slide close.
Okay. All right.
If I get in the picture as well, then I'm going to pull more in.
Or go up to the other, but I think I might-
Welcome. Have you got enough space?
Oops.
I guess it'd be two chairs? Three chairs.
There was two.
All right. Well, maybe this way anyway.
Thank you.
Don't worry about the microphones.
They'll pick up what you-
Okay.
All right. Well, good afternoon, and welcome. Trish, is it?
Yeah, good afternoon. Welcome. So
you're obviously the Social Services and Community committee, and we're hearing
submissions on the Disability Support Services Bill.
Just a couple quick things I'll do, and it's for sort of everyone, not
just for you. So I think probably a few people probably will watch this,
but we're looking forward to hearing from everyone, and
they can say whatever they want to.
But I think as a committee, we're really keen to hear from, if it helps
people when they start thinking what does the committee want to hear.
Really keen to hear about, firstly, what changes
anyone would like to see in the bill. Second, what their biggest concern is.
And third, what their solution would be.
I've also got a little timer, and we won't be completely strict on this, but we'll
try and keep as best we can to. But different people we want to be heard.
But just a little timer to hopefully make it just easier for people
to go through. So just keep an eye on where they are.
We've got five minutes or close to it for everyone.
Might just quickly just go around the table and just get everyone to just briefly
say who they are and what electorate or where they're from.
I'm Joseph Mooney. I'm from Central Otago/Southland, and represent what's called
the Southland electorate.
Kia ora. Priyanka Radhakrishnan,
Labour list MP based in Auckland. Spokesperson for disability
issues.
Kia ora. Kahurangi Carter.
Ngāti Maniapoto Tainui, and I live in
Christchurch Central.
Kia ora koutou.
Maria Menol Kapakingi, Te Tai Tokerau. Kia ora ra.
Hi, Jamie Arbock. New Zealand First from Kaikoura,
and also the King Country today with David Wilson.
Kia ora. Hi, guys. My name is Laura McClure.
I am with the ACT Party, and I'm based in Christchurch.
Nice.
And I'm Maureen Pugh, the MP for West Coast-Tasman.
And for vision-impaired, I've got short brown hair, wearing black with a purple
jersey.
Nice.
Kia ora. I'm Dana Kirkpatrick, the MP for East Coast.
I live in Gisborne and cover the big East Coast region.
So pleased to welcome you here today.
Excellent. Well, with that, thank you very much.
We now have five minutes with you, Trish.
So
fire away. The time is yours. Welcome.
Just a bit of a heads up.
I have a speech impairment.
If you don't understand me,
please
ask me to speak
again. But I do
have a new message.
No, you're doing great.
You're doing fine.
Kia ora. My name is Trish
McQuinn. I have cerebral
palsy.
I am 54. I'm ready to
speak. I am
here
to talk about the Disability
Support Services Bill.
People with disabilities don't
want to be put away in a
corner.
We have rights and a
life
just as anybody else.
I believe people with
disabilities have the right to
make
their way their
w-
I believe people
with
disabilities have a
right to be heard,
taken
care, and not shoved
into a corner. I believe
people with disabilities
have the right to make decisions
that impact their lives.
I oppose this bill because
the SD has not been
inclusive of disability.
This bill
affects our lives. We as
youth have been consulted
from day one, and we have a voice. I
believe
as people with disabilities- I
believe we have a right to be heard.
I
believe people should not be
known what their
lived disability. Because of
myself, I live by myself.
I am now a year about
waiting times in terms with those
of a disability. For
myself, I have the fact where I want
to be.
I was brought up
in a home of compassion. So all
my life, people have labeled me
as a person who has not got a
brain because of my
speech. But look at me. I'm out in
this community, and I'm proud to be here.
This is not where I
trapped in the corner. I believe
people with disabilities have a right to
be heard. Now, the up my
thing is that we have
been put back in institutions,
and that's what I don't believe in anymore.
We have a right to be doing what we want
to do. I believe we have a
voice.
Well said. Very good.
No, thank you very much, Trisha.
No, no.
I think we understood that clearly.
Yeah.
And you express yourself very well. So you're absolutely right.
You have a right to be heard, and thank you for coming and for giving us an
opportunity to hear from you this afternoon.
And yeah.
You did better when you threw away the script.
Most people-
I'll hold the notes
... most people do. Yeah. We want to hear from you.
Absolutely.
And so you did very well. We heard clearly from you, and we really appreciate it.
So thank you very much for coming and talking to us
this afternoon.
Well done. Did very well.
Appreciate it.
Have we got any questions?
Any questions?
Nope.
I think you left us speechless because you made- ...
yourself so clear to us. But no, you did make your message very clear, Trisha.
I really appreciate that, so thank you so much.
Been awkward.
You guys been there.
Good challenge.
And then I want to have a good look at my teeth.
All right.
You got a stone?
We need to bring a stone.
No, I don't think we need to bring a stone.
I think we have a stone table.
Seeing all the doors, yeah.
All right. Thanks, Trisha.
Don't fires open, so we'll jump.
Our next speaker. Good day, Nick. Good to see you.
It's a hard act to follow.
It's yeah. No pressure.
You have a challenge, Nick. You've got to--
Trisha's laid the weto on the line.
I know. I feel the pressure.
Kia ora koutou members.
My name is Nick Rowin, and
it's nice to see members again.
Mm-hmm.
It's unfortunate that we have to make this a regular occurrence-
Mm
... coming to talk about how disabled people's rights are being
assaulted on a regular basis. But
for those of you who don't know, my name is Nick Rowin, and I'm a senior leader and
a former member of Disabled Persons Assembly's National Executive Committee and a
former chair of Wellington City Council's Accessibility
Advisory Group. But I appear
in front of you today in my personal capacity.
I want to be clear, I support the principle
that disability support services deserve a
durable legislative foundation.
The absence of one has cost this country decades of
fragmentation and inequality.
The objective is sound, but this bill does not deliver it
in any way, shape, or form. I've identified five
structural failures serious enough to require substantial amendments
before this bill proceeds any further.
Clause 8
inverts self-determination by forcing
disabled people to exhaust their own resources, meager as they are,
and that of their families, before the Crown accepts any
obligation.
That is not person-centered.
That is beginning with the assumption that the person is
a burden.
Second,
this bill violates the New Zealand's obligations under the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The government's own regulatory impact statement acknowledges that
consultation required under the convention did not
occur before the bill was introduced to the House.
The government introduced legislation affecting 55,000 disabled
New Zealanders while admitting it broke the rules.
And this select committee process, while it's nice to meet all the members
here today, does not make up for that breach.
Third, natural justice.
The Supreme Court unanimously held up the rights of
family
carers in the Fleming decision in December 2025.
This bill reverses that decision within months,
before a single alternative support was in place.
That is the definition of what natural justice
exists to prevent
Fourth, ministerial power.
This bill lets a single minister design, alter, and
potentially restrict disability support by written
notice
with no parliamentary oversight, no independent review,
and most
concerning, no floor of entitlement in primary legislation.
Good law should not work that way.
And lastly,
and fifth, families. 63% of
carers of disabled children say they just do not have enough money to
support their children or themselves.
This bill responds to this situation
by extending family financial obligations across
aunts, uncles, cousins, and grandparents with no
additional funding.
That is not a carer strategy. That is cost
shifting onto people who are already at breaking point.
I am here to ask this committee to do what the government
would not do.
Consult, amend, and put it right.
The test is simple: Does this legislation leave
disabled New Zealanders more secure or less secure?
With this bill as currently drafted, the answer is clear.
I ask you to use the power that you have as members of this select committee
to put things right.
Thank you. I'm happy to take questions.
Thanks. We have a question from Paula Enoki.
Thanks, Nick.
Quick question on the point that you make under ground three, which is
that so much that is substantive in this bill is relegated to
secondary legislation.
Do you have a view on what level of information you'd like to see in
primary leg?
I think it should be explicit in primary leg.
If we're going to put the types
of entitlements that disabled people and families receive
in secondary leg, we're effectively hiding the entitlements in
secondary leg, which is completely hidden from plain
sight. We must place it into primary leg.
So would it be the types of entitlements, the criteria, and the amounts
that you'd be wanting to see?
Well, I'll draw a comparison. We do that with the Social
Security Act.
Mm.
Everything is in plain primary legislation in the Social
Security Act. I ask this committee, why are we making a distinction with this
piece of legislation and hiding it away in secondary leg where
no one can know what it is. No one can see any decision-making
around what people's entitlements are, what
the decision-making criteria is.
Why the distinction? Why the distinction for our most vulnerable members of the
community?
I might just ask you a last supplementary, Nicholas.
Are you aware that currently there is no legislation really
in this space, and things can be changed by a
cabinet minute, by a letter from a minister.
So this is actually providing clarity and transparency that's never been there
before.
Exactly. So that's my point. There is no clarity.
There is no legislative framework today.
I'm not here to say that what's here today is right.
Mm.
What I'm here to say is put it right because it's not right now.
And you have the opportunity to make some recommendations to put it right.
And if this committee comes back with a recommendation to just give a free
pass to the government on this piece of leg, then you're just effectively
saying that all of the things that are wrong with this
piece of legislation are just going to carry on, and we're going to
put families in poverty. We're going to put disabled people in a situation
where they have no idea how their entitlements are going to be decided on.
Mm.
You have the power within this committee to make it right, to put it right.
All right. Thanks for making a submission this afternoon, Nick.
Tena koe. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Helena.
Hi.
Welcome.
Thank you very much.
All right. So we've got five minutes with you, so-
Okay. Thank you
... the time is yours.
I'm quite nervous, so this is my first-
Oh, no. Go for it.
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to you today, not as an advocate or a
natural support, but as a mother of two adult sons who require
full-time residential care. My name is Helena Faiti, although
in this context, I am proudly Adrian and Don's mum.
I'm here to share why families like mine are worried and concerned by the
Disability Support Services Bill, and why I believe it must be
rejected in its current form.
For years, parents like me have worked with schools, health providers,
therapists, MSD, and other government agencies and their
contracted providers to ensure our children are safe,
respected, and supported in New Zealand as equal citizens.
This bill, in its detail, threatens that foundation in three
ways.
Firstly, it abdicates the state's responsibility.
This bill states that families and whanau have
responsibilities for the well-being of their members in the first
instance. Nearly all the families I know operate this
family-first principle and have done so from day zero.
Mm.
Frankly, formalizing this principle is harmful.
It deflects the Crown's duty onto the shoulders of exhausted and aging
parents. My sons are now 32 and 38.
They need 24/7 care and supervision, and I no longer have the
energy to provide this safely in my home day in, day out.
By making state care sound like a contribution or a favor
rather than a right, this legislation is signaling a silent
withdrawal of government support
For most New Zealand parents, legal responsibility for a child ends
when that child turns 18. Our sons, as I said, are now 32
and 38, well beyond that age. Yet under this bill,
families like ours would still be considered
responsible in the first instance.
As the definition of family in this bill casts a very wide and
interesting net, it tells us that under the first principle,
public funded support is conditional upon utilizing available
family and community resources.
In families like ours, once my husband and I are no longer up to this
role, this would mean that the responsibility lies with our
brothers and sisters and uncles and aunts.
And if none of them are available, step-families, cousins, nieces,
nephews will have to take up this role. This feels unsafe.
Secondly, I am grateful that no one support changes for three
years. But in 2019, this bill will give
sweeping powers to the minister to set up new programs with
minimal public or any parliamentary scrutiny.
It leaves the door wide open for the possible future income and
asset testing without any baseline protections in law.
Families who have planned and worked to secure a safe living environment for
their loved ones are now living in fear that the rug will be pulled out from under
them, and that they will be forced to cover impossible to predict
costs out of their own pensions. Thirdly,
I cannot ignore the context in which this bill was rushed to Parliament.
It was drafted and directly in response to the Supreme Court ruling that
recognized some family carers as government employees.
Instead of using that landmark decision
to honor and fairly compensate families for the immense work they do,
this legislation was designed to shield the Crown from further litigation and
fiscal risk.
It prioritizes balancing the budget over the dignity and equality
of our disabled loved ones. This makes me sad and worried.
Love and necessity drive me and my husband to care for our sons,
but love should never be a substitute for government
infrastructure. The state has a moral obligation to provide
sustainable long-term support for New Zealand's most vulnerable
citizens. This bill is telling families like mine that
our equality in modern society is some sort of fiscal problem to be
managed and controlled.
Are we now somehow a burden or a second-class citizen?
Disabled New Zealanders and their whanau deserve the legislative framework that
protects their rights, not one that treats them as obstacles to
avoid. I urge you to reject this bill.
We must go back to the drawing board and build a system
with the disability community, not a system done to them.
Well done.
Thank you. Quinn?
Thank you.
Thanks.
You mentioned that you already operate from, and many others already
operate from a Families First issue.
Yes.
But that formalizing it is dangerous.
Now, the minister has said previously that she's just codifying what already
happens. Can you tease out-- I'm playing devil's advocate.
Yes.
Can you tease out why codifying it in law is dangerous?
So when you're a little bit younger you can
do it. But
when our children were little, I could afford not to work, and I just look
at the young ones around me today that have their disabled
children, and they are-- Sorry.
It's all right.
They're having to work as well in this.
And so if they have to work and do childcare and
do that, but they still have to look at their own resources first,
how are they ever going to be able to afford to
own their own home or
do things like that? I think if you say the family has to exhaust their
resources first, that's
just too much on humans.
Well, thank you, Hannah, for
sharing your experience with us this afternoon. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Well done.
All right. Next speaker is Assistive Technology Suppliers New Zealand, Gary
Holmes, the CEO.
Welcome, Gary.
Thank you.
ATS-NZ represents the businesses that manufacture, import, and deliver
assistive technology across New Zealand.
Wheelchairs, communication devices, home modification, and
mobility aids. We are the supply chain.
We are not a disability advocacy group, and we want to be clear about that.
Our concern with this bill is commercial and practical, and they come from
our direct experience of what is happening when DSS funding
settings change without notice.
So our biggest concern is clause 11 (3) and .
These subclauses give a future minister explicit statutory authority to
introduce means testing for DSS eligibility by written
notice, without a parliamentary vote, and without any obligation to
consult the sector. DSS has never been means tested.
If the government wants to change that, it is a significant enough decision to
go through the parliamentary process.
The second concern sits alongside it in clause eight, and it's already been
referred to, the Families First principle.
Where a family's resources and natural supports are assessed
before equipment is prescribed, fewer people will receive
funded assisted technology, not because the clinical need has gone
away, but because the framework allows family circumstances to be
weighed first. Our members see family situations up close.
Financial capacity on paper does not always mean a disabled
family member's needs are prioritized in practice.
When DSS funding settings can change by written notice, suppliers
can't plan. We carry inventory, we employ specialist
technicians. We make workforce and stock decisions
12 months or even more ahead. A sudden eligibility
change gives us nothing to work with, and the practical result is reduced
investment, withdrawal from harder to reach markets,
particularly regional communities, and ultimately less competition,
which means higher procurement costs- For the funders this bill is
designed to serve. The government has its own interest in a healthy
supplier market. We're asking for four things, and none of them change the
framework. One, consult the supply sector before
ministerial programs are made with a minimum of 30-day notice
period written into the bill. Two, require a parliamentary vote to
introduce means testing. Remove or constrain Clause 11
(3) and .
Amend Clause 8 so that the families first principle cannot
override a clinical AT prescription from an
occupational therapist or a specialist assessor.
And more time on this process. As a couple of people have already referred to,
three weeks is really not enough.
Mm.
Just in closing, the government's own regulatory impact statement
acknowledges that there was no consultation before this bill was introduced.
The supply side of the disability support system was not at the
table. We're asking for the committee to recommend the safeguards that make
this framework workable for suppliers and, more
importantly, for the disabled New Zealanders who depend on the equipment that we
deliver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mm.
All right. Thank you, Gary. I only have two quick questions for you.
One is, my understanding is there is a
means testing mechanism already in place for DSS,
and this is simply formalizing what that process so it's transparent.
Are you aware of that?
Well, I'm
not fully aware of that. I'm actually relatively new to the industry.
But
I'm just referring to that particular point that I made about
that,
which is where I-
Oh, look, if you don't know that-
Yeah. Anyway
... that's fine.
Yeah.
The other question is,
are you aware that this government has made the biggest investment ever into DSS
services? $1.1 billion uplift last year
and took 376 million this year, so a total of
$2.933 billion.
Right. The numbers are good, and the investment is always welcome.
But if you want to get this legislation right-
Mm
... you need to get it right. And I think there's a lot of others that have spoken
before me and a lot more you're going to hear from, who are giving you the
practical realities-
Mm
... of some of the concerns that they see in this particular bill.
No one's denying that the government has spent what it has spent and invested in
this particular sector, but you need to make sure we get the framework right.
Thank you.
Mm.
Greg?
Yeah. Just a quick
question that I asked a previous submitter in terms of the level of
information in primary versus secondary legislation.
You've outlined some of it
under point six, but do you have a view of how much should be in primary
versus secondary leg?
That's probably a little too technical for my brain-
It's okay
... this afternoon. But, I think we're just putting the main
concerns and the principles down.
Yeah.
That's up to you good folk to sort of determine how that is delivered.
But
the select committee process is a great one.
It's great that you get the input from the end users-
Mm
... and from the suppliers in this particular situation.
I don't envy your job in trying to have to balance it all, but I hope that you
take on board some of the concerns that have been raised today.
Yeah. We do.
No, thank you very much, Gary. Appreciate you coming.
Thank you.
Cheers.
All right. Next submitter is Gary Williams.
I think he's out of the way for you, Gary.
Welcome, Gary.
Oh,
welcome, Gary. We've got the committee this afternoon, so we have
five minutes or so with you this afternoon at the time. Awesome.
We look forward to hearing from you.
Yeah.
Thank you
for taking time out of your busy lives
to listen to this
today. Before I
start, I want to recognize
all the other submitters that have
been speaking before me
because this is really hard
work that we have to do to get
here.
Five minutes
is not a long time
for some of us to make our
points. So
I had a list of 50 points that
I wanted to make.
All important in my mind
so that you can make
the best decisions that you can.
But
I'm going to focus on
one or two things.
It's half past 4
on a Tuesday afternoon.
There's somebody out in the
world
who wants to get out of bed because
their support person hasn't come
today.
Or their
grandmother who's only
had
four or five hours sleep in the
last week. And so
the persona that you have
about disabled people in our
community
needs to consider that we don't
fit into one neat,
nice box.
Um,
The concept of it is still
oblivious to
most of the 50,000
disabled people who
qualify would get assist.
And
I know that we talk
about disabled people, and
there might be 900,000 of
us, but the people that we're
talking about now are those
50,000 disabled people
who get the most support
from the system.
And
these are people whose lives
are intertwined with other
systems, like universities
and daycare and
housing and employment and
education.
So
if I think about the idea of
reassessing, I think that
the floor doesn't
understand that disabled people
that will be affected by
this legislation because the
disabled people affected by this
legislation are the poorest of the
poor. That means excluded
from
education, that means excluded from
employment.
Some of us can't even leave our
home.
So
I want to
leave today with this, that you
consult
the people whose lives are going
to be affected by this
wide-ranging
piece of legislation because
I'm sure that you'll go home
sometime.
People can't leave their home. And
so
please, please, please, don't chuck us out
of the proverbial nest because
you want to save a few
million dollars because it's
always got to be a
false economy. I'd like to
finish now because I get a bit
emotional about this. Thank you for
listening.
Well- Gary ... thank you very much, Gary.
You expressed yourself very articulately and made yourself very clear.
You're welcome.
And thank you for making those points and coming.
We've heard you loud and clear.
Oh, my pleasure.
Appreciate that. Gary's come all the way from Christchurch. Thank you.
Come all the way from Christchurch. Well- Wow ... good on you.
That's a-
Yes
... it's a long trip.
Mm-hmm.
Been a long- Well, thank you, and hope you have a good day, good trip
to Wellington as well. Appreciate it.
The next submitter is the Cerebral Palsy Society of New Zealand.
Daniel and Claire.
That's Daniel up there.
Good afternoon.
Welcome.
Tena koe, nga mema o tenei committee.
Ko Daniel Clay toku ingoa. Ko au te Hiamana o te ropu
Hokai Nokorangi.
Sure.
My name's Daniel Clay. I'm the chair of the Cerebral Palsy Society.
Cerebral palsy is the most common childhood physical disability and affects
approximately 9,000 New Zealanders.
Many people with cerebral palsy have high and complex needs and need significant
support.
The vast majority rely on disability support services rather than ACC.
The committee has asked submitters what their biggest concern is and what changes
they want to see. On changes, I've tracks and changes to the
infamous Clause 8-
Yeah
... and a few others, which I can hand around while I'm
continuing with my statement.
And I'll get to that at the end.
Our biggest concern with is that the bill assumes that families can provide more
support if government support is reduced.
The evidence shows otherwise. We surveyed 140 members
for our submission who rely on those services.
Almost half of the respondents reported providing more than 40
hours of unpaid care every week, and more than a
quarter provide over 80 hours of unpaid care
a week. Many whanau are effectively providing a second full-time
job in unpaid care. They're already filling significant gaps in the
current system. And just on the question about codifying the current system
or current practice, if that's the case, that's not right.
The current system is not working and whanau are filling the gaps,
and what this bill does is make it worse.
Most respondents, unsurprisingly, told us that the current disability support
services do not meet their disability needs. The consequences are substantial.
The vast majority of respondents reported impacts such as caregiver exhaustion,
burnout, mental health impacts, relationship strain, lost employment
opportunities, and financial pressure.
These are not hypothetical future risks of a CBA.
These are occurring now. More than two-thirds said they could not
provide more support if funding were reduced, and that providing
significantly more care themselves would simply be unmanageable.
Many respondents also expressed deep concern about the future.
Parents are already providing substantial support well into their children's
adulthood, and are worried about what will happen when they age,
when age, illness, or death means they can no longer
provide support. This highlights an important issue with the bill.
There's a significant difference between the responsibility of parents
raising a disabled child and the expectations placed on family and
whanau members, widely defined, of disabled adults.
Those situations should not be treated as equivalent.
Reducing support would also have wider serious economic consequences for
individuals and the economy. Most respondents told us that reduced
support would affect their household's ability to remain in paid employment.
And over half said that means testing would have a major negative impact, with
less than 10% anticipating no impact.
In other words, reducing support does not simply shift
responsibility from government to families.
It would also reduce workforce participation and increase financial
pressures, driving more families and whanau of disabled people into
economic hardship. We submitted that the bill should not proceed in its current
form. However, if the committee wishes to proceed, we provided proposed
amendments. These amendments, first and importantly, making clear that
the government has primary responsibility for disability-related support
needs, while families play an important complementary role.
Secondly, removing the provisions enabling means testing, and third, require
meaningful consultation on future support programs.
In summary, our message is simple.
Families are already doing an extraordinary amount, more than they should.
Many are at breaking point. They cannot do more.
The practical effect of the bill is therefore likely to be reduced support for
disabled people, not increased family care.
We ask the committee to recognize that supporting disabled people is not a matter
of charity or family capacity.
Mm.
It is a fundamental responsibility of the government.
Kia ora, and I welcome your questions.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, Dan. I might just kick it off.
The minister has said on a number of occasions,
including to our committee last week, that this bill will not change the
entitlements of anyone at all. So you have that on one
side, and then you have a government which has made a record investment, the
biggest ever, into disability support services.
Why do you think this bill will do the opposite?
Well, I'm not sure the minister said it won't change at all.
I think what she said is it won't change anything straight away, immediately.
Exactly.
The purpose of this bill is to set up a framework, which I can agree with
and the committee members didn't raise concerns with, a
framework for future changes measured against the principles, including,
I don't call it family first, I call it family substitution.
Family is always first.
Mm.
On your second point, so I anticipate changes.
So if this is just codifying what's happened, two points.
One, I don't think it is, and two, what's happening now is simply not
acceptable. Your second point, sorry, remind me.
Oh, just that the government's made a record investment, the biggest ever-
Oh, yes. Yes
... into disability support services.
Of course.
Why do you think it won't-
And we appreciate that. But for the individual disabled person and the individual
whanau who are struggling now, providing 40, 80
hours of unpaid care a week
of disability support,
that means nothing. That doesn't help them.
So we acknowledge that, we recognize and we appreciate that.
The fact is, the disability population is generally growing.
Needs are higher, particularly in intellectual disability.
There's a growing proportion of those.
As I say, cerebral palsy,
in the main, or for a lot of people, is high complex needs.
And a lot of whanau, they can't get their whanau members to help.
These are expert,
qualification required roles in terms of
caregiving. So acknowledge that, but that doesn't solve individuals'
problems.
Oh, look, thank you very much, and thank you for making submissions this afternoon.
Thank you for what you and your organization do for the disabled.
Yeah.
Thank you, Dan.
No, problem.
Can I just acknowledge, too, the suggestions you've made for changing the bill.
Mm-hmm.
It's really helpful to us.
Yeah, appreciate it. As a former lawyer, I love that stuff.
Nice.
As a lawyer you're always the only one, isn't it?
Yeah. Pretty much. It's true.
Yeah. Exactly.
All right. Next submitter is Disabilities Resource Center Trust via Zoom.
Show
your name and voice.
I wondered what that noise was.
I know. Who's that?
Oh, there we go. Now we can see. All right, Naomi, we can see you,
and you look like microphone's off. Just double-check we can hear you.
Tena koutou katoa.
Oh, excellent. Yep. Loud. Excellent.
Um-
All right. Welcome.
Thank you. Nga mihi nui kia koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Naomi Freeman, and I'm the information services
coordinator at the Disabilities Resource Center Trust in
Whakatane.
Our organization supports thousands of tangata
whaikaha, people with disabilities, older people, carers, and
whanau across the Bay of Plenty. Through our information
service, community engagement and workshops, we hear
directly from people affected by disability support
services every day. We'd like to see the bill
strengthened to ensure that tangata whaikaha, people with disabilities
and whanau remain at the center of decision-making.
In particular, we'd like to see greater flexibility for funding
to respond to individual circumstances, recognition
of the vital role of family carers and whanau-
Stronger safeguards around future changes, clear
commitments that tāngata whaikaha, people with disabilities,
will be meaningfully involved in decisions that affect their lives,
and sufficient timeframes for submissions and engagement.
Our biggest concern is that the bill may create more barriers rather than
removing them.
Many of the people we support are already struggling with rising
costs, limited respite options, transport
challenges, and increasing pressures on whānau carers.
We regularly hear from whānau who are exhausted.
Many people care around the clock and are concerned about what will
happen if supports become harder to access or more
restricted.
We are particularly concerned that if flexibility is reduced,
people will be forced into systems that do not reflect their individual
needs. Disability is not a one size fits all,
and social supports should not be
either. Our solution is simple, trust
tāngata whaikaha, people with disabilities and their whānau.
They know what supports are needed and how that support looks like for
them.
Create a system that is flexible and person-directed, and
responsive.
Ensure funding can be used in ways that genuinely meet
individual needs.
Family carers cannot pour from an empty cup.
Yet every day we hear from whānau who are exhausted,
overwhelmed, and struggling to access suitable respite.
We need urgent investment in respite options,
particularly for those under 65.
We cannot continue to rely on whānau carers to hold the
system together without ensuring they have the
support, breaks, and wellbeing they need themselves.
Make sure funding can adapt as people's circumstances
change, rather than requiring people to continually
prove their needs.
We ask the committee to ensure this bill strengthens choice,
flexibility, and dignity for tāngata whaikaha, people
with disabilities, rather than creating additional barriers.
Whānau provide essential care that sustains tāngata
whaikaha, people with disabilities, within their homes and
communities, and significantly reduces pressure on
residential services in the health system.
The people we support want the same things as everybody else:
to participate in their communities, maintain their wellbeing,
support their whānau, and live good lives.
If there's one message we want the committee to remember, it
is nothing about us without us. Policies may
be written in offices, but their impact is felt in
homes, communities, and whānau every day.
Tāngata whaikaha, people with disabilities, must be partners in
these decisions, not an afterthought.
Thank you for your time in considering our views.
Oh, thank you, Naomi. Appreciate that.
Quick question from me, and I've got a couple others.
Our committee has heard that there's never been a
sort of statutory framework for this before, and in fact, it's relying on things
like 1990s cabinet minutes to do
so. For the first time, let's make a transparent process, and it's reflecting
what's current existing practice.
Just with your experience,
can you just tell us, are you able to look into where these
sort of policies or statutory mechanisms are currently for decisions that are made?
Not me personally, but our CEO would be able to.
Okay. No, thank you. Priyanka.
Thank you for your submission and for laying out quite clearly
what carers experience. You've made a point here
that you strongly believe that family carers must be appropriately
valued and supported. One way, of course, would've been to
accept the Supreme Court finding. That's off the table now.
Given that's off the table by the government, what's
your view on an appropriate,
what that looks like for carers-
Sure
... appropriate family support?
Yeah. It's not sort of making a
day about carers or anything like that.
It's recognizing that they are already providing
a lot of care around the clock, and that if we are
forcing whānau first, that's not
recognizing the work that they're already doing.
Okay.
Lauren, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Naomi, quick question from me around
one of your recommendations. And thank you for making recommendations,
because it does help us reshape the bill.
You've talked about establishing a transparent complaints and
appeals and independent oversight process.
What do you see that looking like?
So
I know that we have the Health and Disability Commissioner where people can make
complaints to.
But often that is a long drawn out process.
And so,
a complaints process within DSS that
is
unbiased
really, and that it is taken,
like the Nationwide Health and Disability Commissioner,
Advocacy Service, sorry, for the commissioner.
There needs to be something independent like that.
Well, thank you, Naomi. I appreciate you making a submission this afternoon.
Thanks for the written submission as well.
And
Lauren said it's great to have recommendations, and I think-
Great
... you and your trust does as well for the community.
Thank you. Yeah. Thanks.
Yeah.
Right. Our next submitter is the Health and Disability Commissioner.
Good afternoon. Welcome.
Kia ora koutou. My name's Morag McDowell.
I'm the Health and Disability Commissioner, and I'm here with Rose Vaughan, Deputy
Commissioner, who has responsibility for the disability portfolio within
HDC.
The HDC is an independent Crown entity whose role it is
to protect and promote the rights of people using health and disability
services, as set out in the Code of Health and Disability
Services Consumers' Rights.
We hold a dual jurisdiction over both the health and disability
sectors.
HDC holds providers to account for responsibilities that they
carry under the code, primarily through complaints resolution,
but we importantly raise public protection concerns and
work to improve the quality and safety of care, for example, by making
recommendations and following those up.
Continuing to strengthen safeguards and promoting quality improvement within
disability support is a key focus for HDC.
Turning to the bill, HDC is particularly concerned about Schedule
1, Clauses 12 and 13, which we believe
misunderstand HDC's jurisdiction and have the potential
to restrict our public protection powers.
To clarify, the Code of Consumers' Rights does not grant
people the right to access services or funding, and
therefore HDC cannot make findings on the decision of
government funding or the rights of family carers.
Family carers more often being providers in the context of our legislation.
However, our act does give us power to bring matters to the attention of
any person or authority,
where it is necessary or desirable in the public interest or safety,
including those issues related to access and funding, which
affects people's rights under the code.
As currently drafted, Clauses 12 and 13 may
inadvertently constrain HDC's ability to raise
matters with other agencies, including public health and safety
concerns, where a complaint in whole or in part
alleges discrimination relating to funding of family carers.
This is because the broad wording in Clause 13
means that HDC could not take any action or further action on such
complaints.
So enacting the bill in its current form risks diluting
HDC's public protection and quality improvement powers.
We therefore request that
reference to HDC in this part of the bill be removed.
And just to note that a similar provision in the 2013 New Zealand Public Health and
Disability Amendment Act did not mention HDC, and
we're unaware of any adverse issues that would warrant inclusion of HDC in
this part of the bill.
If reference to HDC is not removed from the bill,
we would ask that the broad wording in the bill be narrowed so
that HDC can continue to perform its core functions to
assess and take action on complaints within our jurisdiction,
which includes raising matters of public safety and quality improvement to the
relevant agencies. I'm going to pass now to Rose to
comment on our wider concerns about the bill.
Thank you, Morag.
It's acknowledged that the development of a clear legislative framework for
providing disability support services would be of value.
However, we have significant concerns that the bill,
as it is currently drafted, may potentially exacerbate risks to the
safety and well-being of disabled people.
There is an opportunity to ensure the bill is in line with providers'
obligations under the Code of Health and Disability Services
Consumers' Rights and the Crown's obligations under the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.
We note that New Zealand has been a world leader in
disability rights, and as a rights-based agency, we would strongly advocate
for a rights-based approach to a disability support bill.
We've identified areas where the bill, as it is currently drafted, does not
support the safety and well-being of disabled people.
For example, safeguarding is absent from the bill, and it
does not account for the potential for abuse, neglect, and
isolation of disabled people in family settings.
To address this, we recommend that the bill acknowledges the
valued and valuable roles that disabled people play in their families and
communities.
That it incorporates the Code of Rights and the UNCRPD into its
purpose and principles. Establishes a legislative
basis to set quality standards and safeguarding measures across all
government-funded disability support,
and is sent back for comprehensive consultation with disabled people,
disability sector, and other involved parties such as ourselves,
HDC.
Thank you very much. Can I just ask, because I think for me, it goes
without saying that disabled people
play a valued and valuable role in their families' communities.
But what difference would it make having that legislatively encoded and-
Sorry, having it legislatively?
Well, what difference would it make having that legislation?
What
actual difference
would it make having that in legislation? Because I think for me, it's an axiom.
It's a truth. But what difference would it make having that in legislation?
I think it's always important to express a purpose of legislation that
meets the needs of the people to whom the legislation is directed.
It shows intent and purpose to protect those people and to value those people.
And shows an ongoing commitment to our endorsement of the UNCRPD
and obviously the Code of Consumer Rights.
Well, thank you. Thank you. Oh.
Oh, I'm just picking up on the point, previous question I
had about an appeals process and complaints process.
So,
are you
thinking that this bill will prevent people from
being able to come to HDC
for that purpose? Or is there another way that
appeals, say, on funding allocations or on
complaints can be dealt with?
I think that currently if somebody raised funding or
access issues, that's outside the
jurisdiction of HDC. But that said, if those
funding or access issues impact the rights of consumers,
HDC currently has the ability to raise those concerns,
those public health and safety concerns, with the
agency or authority who has the opportunity to act on those
concerns.
Okay. It just sounds like it needs strengthening in some way.
The right of people to be able to make complaints.
Yes.
Certainly in terms of the provision of service or care and-
Yes
... to the extent to which a person's rights might be impacted as a consumer
of services, I'm confident that HDC has that
jurisdiction.
Okay.
The question comes around when there are issues raised
around access and funding.
Okay.
And could I also add, I think that we need to recognize the potential
challenge, well, the challenges for consumers to complain in this context
where they are potentially complaining about family members and the
challenges of isolation and the ability-
Oh, okay
... to complain and the likes.
Yeah, okay.
And then also the issues we've talked about in terms of
being clear as to what the--
Our previous report had identified issues around what a person could expect
in terms of disability support, and being able to be clear about, um,
the mechanism for monitoring the quality of it.
And I think those issues
are still apparent in this, they apply in this context as well.
Okay. Thank you.
Well, no, thank you both-
Thank you
... for making submissions this afternoon.
And also thank you for your written submission.
It's very helpful to have that as well.
Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
Our next submitter is, am I saying that correctly, Eliza
Burt?
I think I wrecked it.
Or do I say it the-
Elisa.
Elisa. Sorry, Elisa.
Kia ora. No, all good.
Welcome. Thank you. You've got five minutes this afternoon.
Kia ora.
The floor is yours.
My name is Elisa. Lovely to be here. Thank you for having me.
You have obviously spoken to an immense amount of very, very qualified people.
I am currently a teacher aide at a school called Kimi Ora.
We're a specialist school for kids with really
intensive needs. So a lot of non-verbal kids, a lot of
cerebral palsy, physical disability.
So my role currently, and I'm also not speaking on behalf of Kimi, but I have
talked to a lot of people who work at Kimi, and a lot of us actually didn't really
know about this legislation. This bill has been passed with not
a lot of...
I don't know, it's
insane to me that so many people don't know. But anyway.
So yeah, work around Kimi Ora kind of includes obviously
being with the kids day-to-day basis, helping
regulate, and also helping provide the skills and
doing that extra care work that
families actually can't account for.
I think our wait list is currently, like, 300 kids long, and access to
appropriate education is only a very, very small portion of
what these kids deserve to have. My biggest concerns
with this bill, obviously, there are a lot, but mainly
that disabled communities have been immensely
excluded from these conversations.
The disabled community has not been consulted.
The government's own regulatory impact statement acknowledges that the bill was
developed and introduced without the consultation with disabled
communities, and acknowledges this as a risk of inconsistency with the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
It also strips complaint pathways for disabled people around healthcare and matters
under the bill, rights that every other New Zealander has access to.
As you've heard from so many people today, but family pressure,
it's disproportional. The means testing in this
context simply transfers the cost of disability from the state to the
disabled person and their family.
Disability is not income contingent and disproportionately affects lower income
households, obviously. The cost of a wheelchair, a support worker, a hoist,
and respite bed does not vary by household income.
We also have proportional pressure on women, low income, and Pasifika families.
It's such a given that it's insane to me that this
isn't considered at all in this legislation.
Family carers in question are often women, often older,
often Māori or Pasifika, and have already spent years navigating a system
that under-recognizes their work.
A lot of the students that come into Kimi, we have a really high proportion of
lower income families, so a lot of single mothers, a lot of
Pasifika, Māori communities,
and so many of them already don't have the support outside of school
that to bring these kids into an education system, it's like
you can't
support them in the way that they need because they're already lacking so
much support outside and in their houses and
all of that.
So
the bill does not address the underlying issues that their claims raise.
It simply removes their right to bring it before a tribunal, and that is a use of
legislative power that should be profoundly concerning.
One of my good friends, she lives in Waiheke, she has a older brother who
is severely disabled, and she has become his
primary caregiver with no pay.
She
obviously has immense mental health issues.
She had to drop out of her university degree, and for the current future,
she is not going to be moving out of home because she is her brother's
primary caregiver.
Obviously, current system doesn't work,
so why are we trying to make it harder?
Which it is what it feels like this legislation does.
Obviously, I would recommend that this bill does not proceed, and if the bill
proceeds in any form, means testing powers should be removed entirely.
Schedule 1, Clause 10, which extinguishes
the Active Employment Relations Authority claims by family caregivers should be
removed in its entirety,
and those claims should be allowed to proceed through the existing tribunal.
The families first, I liked what someone said about family substitution.
Thought that was lit.
But that principle in Clause H should either be removed or substantially
redrafted.
Look, I think the solution here is to listen to all of the people that are coming
before you. These are people with real lived experience,
which I understand could probably feel, yeah, from
a
beehive tower, maybe it's a little bit
. But yeah, these are the people that you guys promised to serve, and they
are not being served. Creating legislation that includes disabled communities in
the conversation is important, and that actually aims to support
individual disabilities and their
people and their families and target real systemic issues that create
circumstances in which disabled people struggle to merely exist.
Yeah, the idea of these kids that I work with growing up under a government
that not only actively excludes them from conversations about their own rights,
but also disregards them as full, beautiful, brilliant human beings is
extremely disappointing to me, and I'm sure is to a lot of people.
So, yeah.
Oh, thanks Eliza. Thank you very much for making submissions after. Appreciate it.
All right. And next order is on Zoom.
Kia ora. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Yep, good seeing you. Welcome. Thank you.
So we have five minutes with you this afternoon. The time is yours.
Kia ora. Thank you. My name is Anya.
I'm a disabled person. I'll take my written submission as read,
and I wanted to present to you this time in a creative form
of a poem.
So, I'll read that out and then I'm happy to take questions.
Cool.
The Crown is wrapped up cozy these days, blanketed by the
Disability Support Services Bill.
It insulates itself in one more layer of fiscal
protection, non-consensually yanked from the shivering
bodies of disabled people and whanau, present and
future.
When I say the Crown is cozy, I mean it has stolen no
shortage of blankets like this one.
The pay equity one off the backs of women was especially hefty.
The climate pollution one off the backs of Kaitiaki Maori was
especially underhanded.
Sorry, just the focus has moved there.
And the total mobility one, well, it gains its notoriety
for freezing disabled people in place.
Anyway, let's look closer at this DSS blanket.
Its financial fibers were hastily stitched together after the
government clocked that the highest court saw fit to grant
family carers dignity through employment rights.
It's a violent blanket, this one. It's a stripper of
autonomy, it's an accomplice to poverty, it's a
foil to trust.
This blanket was designer fit by and for the Crown.
It cannot be mended. It must be shredded.
Kia ora. Thank you. Happy to take questions.
How succinct. Yeah, ka rangi.
Thank you, Anya,
for your beautiful words.
Can you please
tell us if you know if DSS is currently means
tested?
So there's a bunch of different funding streams that come
under DSS.
I don't know if any of them currently are, but I know that individualized
funding isn't now, because we had household
management that was until April, and then the categories are
removed now.
But I think the bigger thing I would emphasize there is that just
because things were a certain way before, because
obviously it's quite possible to do a lot without legislation, right?
There's nothing stopping you. That doesn't make them okay.
I think that's an important distinction to make.
And so the other thing that I'd just emphasize, I
find reprehensible to be honest, is the setting of a
purpose and principles of DSS through this process when this process was
clearly designed to be looking at the kind of family
carer claim process in the first place
and the framing has actually in the regulatory impact statement at
least, has kind of pit disabled people against family carers because
it's suggesting, oh, if these family carers, if more of them win their employment
claims, then that money's going to come out of
individualized funding for disabled people.
When actually, we need all of this ecosystem of
support to work and to be well for disabled people and
whanau to be able to thrive together.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. And thanks for allowing time for questions as
well. I just wanted to pick up on the point that you've made in your written
submission around the presumption, the families first
principle. And you've said that it denies the autonomy of disabled
people. So many have made the case today that it's
dangerous and it should be flipped, government first, family
complimentary. Did you want to just speak to that autonomy bit though?
Because I think that's pretty important as well.
The independence.
Thank you. Yeah.
So- For disabled people to have autonomy,
as is set out in Article 19 of the UNCRPD,
that's about being able to, for example,
choose where they live on an equal basis with others.
But also choose--
some family situations are not the safest or not the best,
and it shouldn't be that a disabled person is needing to
negotiate that while also having to negotiate
their
cares that can actually be something that their life depends on
at the same time. But even if you're not going through that,
it is really important that disabled people are actually afforded the
dignity of being able to have choices
about where we live and how we get support.
Thank you.
Oh, thanks, Aine. Thank you for your written submission and for your creative
expression of your submission, and also leaving time for questions. Appreciate it.
Maori.
All right. Our next submitter is Barbara-- Oh, sorry, Janette Thompson
by Zoom.
Good afternoon, Janette. Welcome.
Thank you so much, Chair.
All right. Looks like what we have, we can see you loud and clear, and a lovely
picture behind you, but time is yours.
Great. Thank you so much.
I come before you today as a Maori woman, as a disabled person,
and as someone who walks every day alongside four
disabled adult members in my whanau.
Our lives are shaped by systems that were
not built with us in mind, and systems that ask you to
justify your existence, your needs, and
our right to live with dignity. So
I want to speak to you today not about the
policy clauses or the legal frameworks.
You have those in my written submission.
Instead, I want to speak to you about
impact, and in doing so,
I will also answer the three questions that you've
asked.
When support's stable, our whanau can breathe, we can
plan,
we can participate in our communities, and we can live a good
life just like any other. But when support becomes
uncertain, everything contracts.
Our world becomes smaller and every
decision that we make becomes a calculation.
Every day becomes a negotiation with a system that reacts
defensively when disabled people ask for better.
And this leads me to your first question.
You asked what changes do I want to see in the
bill. I want to see a bill that reflects the realities
of disabled people and whanau hauora,
especially Maori whanau,
who already carry more than most people will ever see.
This means removing the family first expectations,
strengthening protections against sudden changes to
supports, and embedding genuine co-design
with disabled people and tangata whaikaha Maori at
every stage.
Without these changes, the bill
just can't uphold equity,
dignity, or partnership.
Your second question was what's my biggest concern?
In a nutshell, my biggest concern is the sweeping ministerial powers.
It's the ability to change services, roles, and supports
without warning, which creates instability
and fear. For whanau like
mine, instability is not an inconvenience, it's a
threat to our health,
our income,
our responsibilities in the context
of being able to continue to manage
our family
appropriately and our ability to
continue to live safely.
And
having those powers at the ministerial level would
make our world just
even more smaller.
If you were to ask me what solutions I would propose,
for me, it's simple.
Rebuild the bill
with us.
Not around us, not for us,
but with us.
I'm asking the committee to consider
honoring Te Tiriti, honoring Article 4.3 of the
UNCRPD, honoring the EDL
principles that
the government has already committed to.
Create a legislative framework where disabled
people, tangata whaikaha Maori, and whanau
hauora are partners in design, decision-making,
and governance, not afterthoughts.
For us, this isn't
theoretical. It's the difference between a
life that we believe is possible and a life that
could be consistently under threat.
I'm asking you
to see beyond the wording of the bill and-
To understand the lived reality of all shape.
Disabled people and their whanau deserve stability.
We deserve partnership.
We deserve equity, and we deserve to be part
of the decisions that determine our
futures.
And I'm asking you as a committee to reconsider this bill
and
choose to rebuild it with us.
Nga mihi
nui kia koutou, and I'm happy for
any questions you might have.
Thank you very much, Janne. We are over time now, but I just want to thank you for
your written submissions and for your oral submission, and appreciate you putting
that and just answering those three questions the committee had.
That's really helpful. So, thank you very much.
Well done.
All right. Our next submitter is Barbara Falk, also via Zoom.
You asked which one?
Hi there.
Barbara. There we go, Barbara.
I'll just put my video on. Sorry.
Great. Thank you.
Basically, my name's Barbara Puri, and thank you for having me
today. I'm a parent of three children, the oldest of
whom has severe cerebral palsy,
and is in an electric wheelchair, and is in his
mid-30s.
I'm also trained as a professional in the area of disability and
families,
and have worked at the University of Auckland, Otago, and Otago
Polytechnic. I was also a school principal.
So I have a range of experiences that I bring to the table, and
in terms of my submission, you will have had an opportunity to read it.
And really, I want to talk to the last three paragraphs in that
submission just to
bring you up to speed and answer your questions.
So the first concern that I have about this bill is the lack of
consultation, which has been noted through previous speakers
clearly,
and the fact that after being beaten for the last couple of years
by the previous Minister of
Disability Issues, Penny Simmonds, we then had great
hope that things would change with the current minister.
But we were meant to have greater freedom and
control on the 1st of April, particularly for those with individualized funding.
Mm-hmm.
And suddenly, six weeks later, this bill comes into play that no one
had seen or heard of. And I guess that's my concern all along,
having been in the system as a parent for over 30 years-
Mm-hmm
... believing in the very beginning about special education in 2000 and the
changes it was going to make.
We have had a series of battles, if you like, on our hand
over the years to maintain dignity and to enable our
sons or daughters or people themselves with disability.
I now find myself with a hearing impairment, so I fall into that
category as well,
to live an ordinary life. And without aids and
technical solutions and funding and
support from both family and whanau, it is very
difficult to live an ordinary life.
That's all my son wants, that's all I want.
And nothing about us without us. And I think
people have talked about, I guess, the danger sometimes that there
are family situations that don't work.
But in our family, we have been
extremely involved right from the outset with our son, and that's why I
went and studied in this area to find out more about
disability, to be able to make education decisions with
my son
around what is best for him. He has individualized funding.
He has 10 to 12 carers a week.
And
he lives a very ordinary life in his own rental property away from his
parents, as many young people in his 30s.
He loves to party at the weekends. He's an ordinary
boy. And he volunteers at work and has just
moved into four hours a week paid work, of which he's very proud.
But those things wouldn't be possible without the IF support that he
has from the government. And I guess that's my biggest fear and
concern in many families, that there seems to be an
implication in this bill that somehow family's going to be able to fund their
children and find that money through philanthropic means.
Which, if you've ever done grant applications, they're not easy.
And I don't think we've got the spare time to be doing that, especially as
we get older, his needs get greater.
I can't lift him now like I used to be able to because he's
about my size. So those are the concerns that we have, the lack of
consultation, the sudden springing of the bill,
and the fact that actually families are suddenly
expected to financially contribute to care
when many families I know are really struggling.
We've never both been able to work, my husband and I, because one of us
always had to be the full-time carer when Josh was growing up.
So basically, that's our situation, and that, I think
what's presented is not a feasible or shared model of care.
People have talked about the
UNCRPD, the lack of
commitment to that. The lack of commitment to Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
The lack of commitment to enabling good lives principles, which we still
don't have them down here in Dunedin in terms of funding
provision. But we love the principles, and the principles are good
principles. And I think people can make them
work. Like IF gives you a lot of freedom to make those things work if
you really want to have them happening. So that's my concern.
Those are the areas I believe that have been missed out hugely
from this bill. In terms of the second
question, well, I think I've covered that, and the lack of choice and
control, particularly that this
bill potentially-
Oh, mm. Oh.
I think we have lost Barbara.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Dunedin lost connection.
Low level bandwidth. I hope you can hear me still.
We don't get a lot-
Oh, just got you back.
Mm.
No.
Solutions to the problem is to leave things as they are.
I know this government seems to be cutting left, right, and center.
If there is a situation where they
cannot avoidably not be able to cut,
then I would say do something like 5% across the board.
That is a fairer system to everybody.
But actually to say I don't want them to cut anything, because we've
just got it to a point where actually we were-
So we are, sorry Barbara, we are well over time, so I will have to draw it to
a close.
Okay. Sorry.
Thank you. But I will just make the comment, though, this government has made a
record investment into the disability support services.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much.
All right. Our next speaker is Bobbi Rose.
Yeah.
Recive audio.
Kia ora. Yes, Bobbi Rose.
Good-
Yeah
... good afternoon and welcome.
Tena koutou. Miha mahana atu kia koutou.
No.
Ko au he uri nō Taranaki tuuturu, nō Te Atiawa hoki.
Tika.
Today I'm here as a whanau member and a carer of a parent
living with Huntington's disease.
And I want to share a bit about our reality and what that looks like.
So you can easily find research that will pathologize
HD. It's an inherited progressive neurological condition affecting
people physically, cognitively, and psychiatrically.
Over time, it impacts your ability to move, to think
clearly, and to regulate your emotions, and eventually to care
for oneself entirely.
Every child of an HD parent has a 50% chance of
inheriting the gene. That means many HD whanau are not
only carers, they're also living with the uncertainty about their own
future. There's much less available about the social impacts
of HD.
HD does not just affect one person, it affects entire whanau.
This bill states responsibility for care
of disabled people rests in the first instance with their whanau.
In our situation, there are no other supports available to rely
on. For example, here in Te Waipounamu, there
is one dedicated HD care coordinator who is limited by
contract to the Waitaha region. Outside of that, there is no
consistent specialized community services.
Whanau are the community resources, and
often the only resource.
My father, for example, receives one neurologist
appointment per year, lasting about 20 minutes.
This is considered sufficient support for a progressive
life-limiting condition. We look elsewhere.
We seek opportunities to participate in research like Enroll-HD,
not just to contribute to science, but to simply get access to
guidance and better understand what's happening and how we can care
for our whanau members.
We advocate constantly, not just for our own whanau, but for
others who feel voiceless. Often educating doctors,
nurses, and needs assessment coordinators about HD,
and these experiences are not isolated.
I have met whanau across Aotearoa from the south right through to
Northland, and our story is echoed in their journeys.
This is where the bill and the impacts of this bill becomes deeply
personal.
It seeks to increase expectations of whanau carers without
providing realistic or adequate support in return or
recognizing what we already give.
We shape our lives, our time, our work, and our
finances around ensuring our loved ones are cared with aroha and
dignity.
We step up because there is no one else to step in.
One moment that has stayed with me was during a GP visit
and he said to me, "You'll know much more about Huntington's than I could ever."
And there was empowerment in that moment, but also deep sadness.
We are the experts of our lived realities, but decisions are being made for
us without us and without reflecting our
reality.
HD may be considered rare, but is not small in its impacts.
Aotearoa does not track the prevalence of HD.
Estimates though show that possibly around 600 to 800 people
will be gene carriers at the moment.
But when you include whanau,
HD affects thousands. This is not a niche issue, it's a hidden
one.
If this bill proceeds in its current form, there is a potential
for further marginalization of HD whanau like mine.
It has the possibility of reducing the little choice,
rangatiratanga, and recognition we have as whanau.
I acknowledge the intent to create a clearer, more consistent, and
transparent system for disability support services, and
I know this is needed. But in its current form,
this bill does not reflect the realities of whanau like mine and should
not proceed without change.
One patai I have for those writing this legislation is
how much more does this-
Government expect us to give when it's clear that it's not being
recognized what we're already giving.
My recommendations are that the bill be paused in its current form at the
moment, that investment is put into understanding the true prevalence
and impacts of conditions like HD in Aotearoa,
and then take the time to listen to the lived experience before
designing frameworks that do not reflect our realities.
All right. Kia
ora.
Thank
you very much, Bobby Rose. Thank you so much for sharing
that with us and also for the work you're doing caring for your parent with
Huntington's. We very much appreciate that lived experience and
perspective.
Thank you.
Right. Our next speaker
is also via Zoom.
Good evening. My name is Makenzie Ninces, and I am
participating in this select committee process as a
32-year-old Pakeha woman who has severe
athetoid cerebral palsy. My disability means
that I can't talk, walk, or use my hands.
Currently, I employ a team of seven part-time
support workers who help with my personal care, provide
transport, and support me to participate in the
community. My hobbies include going to the gym, sailing
both locally and further afield, public speaking, and
serving on a number of boards and committees.
In all honesty, I would like to see the bill scrapped in its
entirety, as I don't think it is fit for purpose.
However, there are some changes which could help improve the bill.
Firstly, I would like to see the bill become focused on the
disabled individual, removing any implication that
disability support is the responsibility of the family.
Similarly, I would like to see any reference to personal
resources and means testing removed.
Furthermore, I would like a commitment that any current supports will
not be reduced, because knowing that our support will not be
reduced would relieve much anxiety and fear.
For example, how can I, in good faith, seek
employment if I don't know that I can employ people to
get me out of bed and accompany me in the community?
Finally, I would like the minister's powers to be limited and
see the bill include a commitment to adequate consultation with
disabled people and their wider community.
My biggest concern is that this bill is dangerous.
It endangers the safety, physical and emotional wellbeing,
and the livelihoods of disabled people, their loved ones, and wider
community. It places the responsibility of care on
families. Most families love each other and provide
support and care to each other as necessary.
This is the way it should be for short periods of time.
However, lifelong disability is different.
I love my family, but at 32 years of age, I wish to live
my life independently, and I want my family members to be
able to live their lives on their own terms, too.
This bill is dangerous because it forces disabled
people to rely on their families, isolating
people, and limiting the ability of both disabled
people and their relatives to exercise free will,
autonomy, and opportunities to reach their full potential.
This bill tells disabled people and their families that they are not
worthy of support and are not entitled to basic human
rights. This messaging sets a dangerous narrative,
basically telling society that it is okay to exclude
disabled people and families from everyday life.
This bill also threatens the employment of support workers,
making more people reliant on the state in the long run.
My solution would be to have one integrated disability system,
which is focused on ensuring the disabled person has what they need
to participate in society to their utmost potential.
The government could save a lot of money by limiting needs
assessments to times where there are changes in the person's health and
disability. For example, I have never been able to
talk, walk, or use my hands. I have always been dependent on other
people. Unless there is a significant scientific
breakthrough, it is likely that I am always going to need
24-7 care. Subsequently, making sure
that I am still disabled every three years seems a waste of
resources. This is where the government could realistically save
money without sacrificing the safety, dignity, and
livelihoods of many of its citizens. Thank you.
Well, thank you very much, Makenzie.
Thank you for making that submission through your augmentative and alternative
communication system. And I also want to acknowledge the 12-page submission
that I know you said took you 30 hours to write, because you primarily communicate
and type through an augmentative
and alternative communication system with your toe.
It was a very good submission, so I want to acknowledge and thank
you for taking the considerable time to do that.
If all of us could do what you can do with your toe, we'd be
a very good, amazing country.
Anything, members? No. Look, I think you've made yourself very clear.
So, thank you again, both in your written and your oral submission.
So, thank you
Right.
We have our next submitter is Suzanne, also via Zoom.
All right. Tena koutou katoa. My name is Suzanne Lamer.
I have worked in the disability sector for over 25 years, both in
residential services and community participation.
I currently support disabled people and their whanau in West Auckland through
employment pathways, creative programs, volunteering
opportunities, and community participation.
My perspective is not only professional, I also have close
friends raising children and young people with complex disability-related
support needs, and have spent many years involved with Special Olympics as a
volunteer, coach, committee member, and former chairperson.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
The committee has my written submission, so rather than repeat it in full, I
would like to focus on my key concerns and the impact I'm seeing on disabled
people and their whanau.
My first concern is the way that disability support is framed within the bill.
In practice, support is far more than care.
Every day I see people using support to work, volunteer,
build relationships, participate in their community, and pursue
goals that matter to them.
Support is not simply care. It's the foundation that makes
participation possible. When disability support is viewed
primarily through the lens of care, we risk losing sight of its
purpose. Disability support should enable people to live ordinary
lives, exercise choice and control, and participate
as equal citizens within their communities.
This is consistent with both enabling good lives and New Zealand
obligations under the United Nations Convention of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.
My second concern is the increased reliance on family and whanau
support. Many families already provide extraordinary levels of
care and support and are often stretched emotionally,
physically, and financially.
Family support is valuable, but it should not be assumed, and it
should not replace appropriate disability support.
I'm hearing significant fear and uncertainty from whanau about the
future. Families are worried about what support will be
available, what opportunities will exist for independence and
participation, and what expectations will be placed on them to fill
the gaps within the system.
For many parents, particularly those raising children and young people with
complex support needs, the question is not just about today.
It's about who will be there to support their son or their daughter when they
are no longer able to do it so themselves.
My third concern is the lack of safeguards and accountability mechanisms within the
bill. Disabled people need confidence that when decisions are made
that affect their lives and support, there are fair, accessible, and
independent ways to challenge these decisions.
Rights are only meaningful when there are mechanisms in place to protect
them.
I'm also concerned that disabled people and whanau have not been given
sufficient time and support to meaningfully engage with legislation
of this significance. If I were to answer the
committee's questions directly, what changes would I like to see?
I would like to see the bill strengthened so that it clearly reflects both New
Zealand's obligation under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and the principles of enabling good lives.
This includes recognizing disability support as a means of
enabling participation, choice, control, and
independent living, while strengthening safeguards, complaint
processes, and appeal rights.
My biggest concern is that the bill shifts disability support
away from rights, participation, and independence, and towards a
narrower model of care and family responsibility.
My solution would be to redesign the bill in genuine partnership with
disabled people, whanau, and the disability sector, ensuring
it is ground in rights, accountability, choice,
control, and independent living.
Disabled people and their whanau should remain at the center of decisions that
affect their lives.
The quality of a disability support system should be measured not by how
little support it provides, but how effectively it enables disabled
people to exercise choice and control, pursue their aspirations,
and participate fully in their communities.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. Priyanca, question.
Thanks so much. Quick question around the very good
point that you make, that this bill seems to frame DSS support as
care rather than a rights-based model.
Are you
saying that partly because there's no detail in this legislation
around DSS criteria, eligibility, decision-making,
and so on and so forth, and just a reliance or shift
towards increased reliance on family?
Yes. In a simple answer. I think that when it's so open to
interpretation, that things may get lost, and I think that that has
a huge impact on people and families going forward.
Okay.
Look, thanks, Suzanne. Thank you for making your written
submission and your oral submission, and thanks for addressing that question the
committee had as well. It's very helpful for us.
Thank you so much.
Our next submitter is Terry, also via Zoom.
We have one more- Terry, okay ... Sarah, which we said during this- Okay.
Move
forward to Sarah? Yep. Yeah. All right. Sarah Montgomery.
If Sarah's available, let's move to Sarah.
Written submission, Sarah.
Hi, everyone.
Hi, Sarah.
I am here.
Thanks. Oh, great. Excellent. Well, thank you.
We have
five minutes with you as well. The time is yours when you're ready
Okay. I'm not sure if you can see me as
well as hear me, but-
We can't see you, but we can hear you loud and clear.
Okay. I can rectify that. Hang on.
There we go.
Oh, there we go. Excellent. No, we can see you now. Thank you.
Sorry about that. I was sitting there for that last five minutes thinking it's not
quite me yet- ... so I've jumped in a little bit early.
No, no. Appreciate it.
No problem.
We are jumping forwards one to get to you, so appreciate you being here.
That's all good. So my name's Sarah McLaren.
I work for a disability support agency called Parent to Parent.
We support families who've got children with special needs, but I'm not here on
behalf of Parent to Parent. I'm here in my own personal
capacity as a family carer.
So I have a 15-year-old who has Prader-Willi syndrome, and she
also has mild cerebral palsy.
So she has pretty high support needs, and so
I'm just going to talk a little bit about my personal situation because I feel like
lots of people have done some technical stuff around legislative
bits and pieces. So I guess
my reflection on this bill is, as a
carer for my mother, who had Alzheimer's, and my dad, who's
currently 90,
who also needs my help, the difference between knowing
what's required of me to support them
and what's required of me to support my daughter going forward in her adult
life
is quite different in terms of I know
when my parents were going to get their pension.
I know
how much money they can have in the bank before the subsidy
for care and rest times kicks in. It's quite detailed,
and I've been able to understand what's required of me
as a family member to contribute to their care as elderly people.
But for my daughter, who's 15,
I don't know what's going to be required of me, and I feel like this
bill is saying that
I'm going to be the primary person, or our family and our wider family,
responsible for providing her care as an adult because she
won't be able to live independently without our support.
And so I just find that to be quite discriminatory,
and I really feel like there's really a big difference between
the legislative framework and the expectation around care of the elderly.
And also, if my daughter was disabled due to an accident,
I wouldn't be means tested before I could access ACC for her
care.
So I feel like,
as you can tell
I'm feeling that there's quite a difference in the way that disabled people are
being treated.
And it makes it very hard for me to plan for my own retirement, how
much
we need to save. And just reading the bill,
especially clause 8, in practical terms, I don't understand what that
means for me. So
for Prader-Willi syndrome, I was at a conference when my daughter was two,
and I met a family, a mother whose daughter was a similar age with
Prader-Willi syndrome, who lived in Chile.
And at the time, she told me that they were going to have a second child because
there was no disability supports in Chile, and that they needed one child to
work to provide the income and one child to provide the
care for their child with Prader-Willi syndrome.
And I thought at the time, "Gosh, I'm so glad that I live in New Zealand."
But at the moment,
I have two children, and my other child is studying at the
moment to be a lawyer.
So
should I prepare her for her hopes and dreams to be different?
Is she going to have to either use all of her income to support
my child, or is she going to have to give up her work?
I don't know.
And this legislation doesn't give me any certainty
for that
for her.
So I feel like you really should just push pause
on this legislation and think about if you,
as a government, have decided that you don't want to pay family carers, even though
the Supreme Court has told you that that's the right thing to do.
But if you don't want to do that, then
make this legislation around that issue alone,
and don't use this process to
try and create a legal framework for disability support
services because there hasn't been adequate consultation.
And I think by legislating that family
members who are disabled have to be looked after by their families in the first
instance,
you're setting a standard in our wider community that
disabled people matter less,
if they're born with a disability than if they get one by an accident or
by
getting older.
And I think that's really wrong. And I think legislation has a great power
in our society to really
send a message to people. I mean, that's why we had the Marriage Equality
Act.
People were already able to have a civil union, but people wanted their
relationships to be acknowledged by society as being
equal. And so if you say disabled people should be
looked after by their families, well, then an employer's not going to go the
extra mile to accommodate them in a job.
People aren't going to put a ramp into their building.
Because
I feel like that's a really, really dangerous thing that you're doing, especially
with that clause eight, and I feel quite upset about that.
I wanted to leave you time to ask questions, but I've gone on a big rant.
If you have got some questions,
I'll be very happy to answer them. And I won't bite.
I really appreciate the opportunity to talk.
Thank you, Sarah. We're running over time, not because of
you.
I'm trying to give as generous as I can to every submitter, but thank you for
making your submission. Also, thank you for, and acknowledge you for the work you
do looking after your daughter and your father as well.
That's-
Helpful.
Thank you.
And over to Asher Lewis.
Okay.
And clearly he's available in case you still need to stop him after, if you're
able.
Right. Okay, let's move to Asher Lewis next. Also via Zoom.
Kia ora.
My name is Asher Lewis. I'm an 18-year-old wheelchair user,
and I'm here today urging you to oppose the DSS bill and
recommend the bill be rewritten with support from places like
Enabling Good Lives, BLENNZ, CSS, and I Lead.
The more I read about this bill, the more concerned I am for disabled New
Zealanders and their whanau. Almost everything in this bill has
concerning consequences for disabled people and their whanau, and it is
hard to order my concerns. So today, I will be focusing on two:
the ministerial programs and the family responsibility clauses.
Quoting from the bill, "To improve consistency and
transparency, the bill enables the minister to make ministerial
programs as secondary legislation." End quote.
This is plain dangerous. This section puts into law
that the minister can decide at any time to introduce means testing,
erase flexible funding, and even cut funding and put those
expenses on the disabled person's loved ones.
Decisions that change the life of over 50,000 people should be made
with the people, for the people.
I recommend that we remove the ministerial programs from the bill and
instead create a system where major decisions and changes to
DSS are made with the support of the disability community in
places like Enabling Good Lives, BLENNZ, CSS, I Lead,
and more.
Another concern is Clause 8. In this clause it states,
"Before being provided with DSS funding, disability support
services
and..."
Sorry, "Before being provided with DSS-funded disability
support services, an eligible person should, where
appropriate, use their resources and any other support that is available
to them, including from other publicly funded sources,
their family, whanau, or other culturally recognized family group,
their community."
This clause will further povertize disabled people and their loved ones.
It puts into law that disabled people are expected to go through their
savings, their family's savings, and then prove there's no one else they
could bring into poverty with them before DSS will provide the support
they need just to live their life. That is a fundamentally flawed
clause and should be removed entirely.
Access to DSS should be the first option, not the last.
Additionally, the emphasis on family responsibility is not in
alignment with international law, and Article 19 of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities that New Zealand signed on to makes New
Zealand obligated to ensure disabled people have access to the support
necessary to support living and inclusion in the community,
and to prevent isolation or segregation from the community.
As a select committee, it is your duty to recognize that this bill is not
up to the regulations New Zealand has obligated themselves to,
and stop this bill from making it into law.
If you want a system that is fair and transparent, prioritizes
disabled people's needs, and fits into a budget, then rolling
out the Enabling Good Lives approach nationwide is going to achieve that,
not this dictatorship-based bill.
If you have any questions, please let me know.
Well, thank you. Just on the ministerial programs,
you're concerned about that being encoded in the
legislation.
Yes.
Are you aware that for the last 30-something years,
ministers can and have
changed DSS funding around
just by a letter or a
cabinet minute or... There has been no framework that's been
transparent to anyone up to this point.
Yes, I am aware of that. And
I understand that
only a couple of years ago, after
people under Enabling Good Lives were allowed flexible funding,
they were very quickly removed from flexible funding, and that
had a significant impact on everyone's lives, and I don't think
that should be happening.
Oh, okay.
Would it be fair to say that your worry is that this bill would entrench that and
allow that to happen?
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm definitely worried about that.
Considering there's over a billion dollars extra funding gone into the
sector-
What's the point if there's-
I think there's a commitment-
... access to it
... demonstrated that the government wants to support.
Mm.
And I'd just like-
To the sector
... to
make a comment around the income-based criteria.
Mm.
Not all disabled people are unable to work, and so
that seems reasonable, and I welcome your comments on this,
that if some disabled people are able to work, that their
income should be assessed against any
allowance that they're entitled to.
I can understand it being that if a disabled person
can work and they have a job, that they
don't need the support from the government.
But there are still other forms of support that they need.
Of course.
They shouldn't-
They should be able to get a wheelchair without needing to
use up their savings-
No, I agree
... and different support workers that they might need, and that
shouldn't be means tested at all.
That's right.
Great. No, thank you, Aisha. Thank you for making a submission this afternoon.
Thank you.
Well done. It's a good submission.
All right. Next submitter is Roderick. Oh, no, sorry. We've got Terry, is it?
And Roderick's ready to go.
Oh, Roderick's ready to go. Excellent. I'll just say Roderick.
Yeah. Roderick Young here. 说 话 者 前 后 置 Thanks for
the opportunity to appear before the committee today.
My name's Roderick Young, and I appreciate the work that the committee is doing and
the importance of ensuring disabled support
services are fair, sustainable, transparent, respectful
of the dignity of disabled New Zealanders and their
families. The committee's asked three questions.
Number one, what changes do I want to see in the bill?
I'd like to see stronger protections for disabled people and their families
through clearer rights
of review and appeal. The bill states that further
legislation will address safeguards, complaints, and appeals, and I believe
these protections should be included as early as
possible so that the people understand what rights they
have
when decisions affecting their lives.
I would also like greater transparency around how funding decisions
are made and how support needs are
assessed. The second question, what is my
biggest concern? My biggest concern is that the
bill may place too much emphasis on the responsibility of
family and whanau without sufficient recognition of
the practical limits many families face.
Families often provide extraordinary
care. However, not all families have the
same resources, health, finance, skills, or capacity.
There is a risk that disabled people may experience
different levels of support depending on the circumstances
of their families rather than their actual needs.
And I am concerned that the people may find it
difficult to challenge decisions if they
believe they have been treated unfairly.
The third question, what would my solution be?
Well, I recommend three measures.
First, establish an independent and accessible appeals
process for disability support decisions.
Second, require regular public reporting
on funding decisions and outcomes so Parliament and
the public can assess whether the system is delivering
equitable support. Third,
ensure that families' and whanau support is
recognized and encouraged, but that the state remains clearly
responsible for ensuring disabled peoples
receive adequate support when family capacity is
limited. In conclusion, disability support
services should be guided by dignity,
fairness, transparency, and accountability.
The objects should be to support disabled New Zealanders
to participate fully in society while
providing confidence to families that the
system is fair and responsible. Thank you for your
time. I welcome any questions from the committee.
Ngā mihi nui. Roderick Young.
Mm.
Thank you very much, Roderick. It was a
very good submission. Appreciate that. Nicely laid out.
Craig? Question?
Yes.
Yeah, thank you for your written and verbal submissions.
I couldn't help but notice when I was reading your submission that one of the bits
that you didn't comment on that others have was the reliance on
ministerial programs.
And I was just wondering whether you had a view on that.
Yeah. Well, the minister, I remember her office, she had a
poster up, and she was very proud that only females were in
her office. And so I challenged that through the
speaker of the house, represent all people.
So I feel that it's important that we have a
more public ability to scrutinize what happens
and so that the ministers are held accountable.
Thank you.
All right.
Yeah, thank you. You've answered everyone's questions by
your
very clear submission, Roderick, and thank you again for that.
It's great to have
for our committee. We like to hear from everyone what they have to say, but it's
really helpful if they answer those three questions that we put forward.
So I appreciate you focusing on that.
Thank you.
Yep, that's good.
I wrote the submission with my thumb even though I'm fully able, but
that's what happens on cell phones these days.
Oh, well, thank you to your son as well. It was a great submission.
Yep. And I did appreciate the question from the person to your left
earlier on. And I think that's where it is.
We have 20 trillion of crown minerals in New Zealand, and we need to work as
a team together. So I'm a fan of everyone working, even the most disabled
people. And so even the over 65s contributing towards
helping disabled people so that we can liberate the
natural wealth that we have in this country.
So it's important to get this bill right so we don't have people out on the
street because their families have abandoned them, the state's abandoned them.
If we have state support and family support and community support, then
this country will be prosperous. Thank you.
Couldn't agree more.
Well said. I think you'll find quite a bit of agreement around some of this table,
at least. So good on you. Cheers
Thank it.
All right. Our next letter is Terry.
Oh, we're going back.
Going back. We're
coming
up.
Terry, we can't hear or see you at this point.
I wonder if you can make either your camera or
your microphone available so we can
see and/or hear you.
If you can hear me, we can't currently hear you or see you.
We're still-- If you can hear me, we're still waiting to
hear or see you.
This is his piece.
Oh.
Shall we circle back?
Yeah.
We might circle back if you can hear me,
and see if the secretariat can help
you
figure out how we can get you online. So we might move forward a bit here.
Rob online.
Yes, we can.
Oh, great. All right. Let's bring Robin.
Oh, good day, Rob.
You can see and hear me?
Yeah, we can see you, hear loud and clear. Welcome. Thank you.
Time is yours when ready.
Thank you.
Cool. Rob Longie.
Now, to go from cruelty to our value.
I have three kids, five under five.
My wife and I both work full-time,
not simply to survive for right now.
We're frantically trying to hit enough financial goals so that one day, one of us
will be able to step back from work and care for our son as he becomes an adult
dependent,
so that he doesn't end up in a residential facility, so that we can
lower the financial burden of our son on the government ourselves.
We are providing value to the government today and tomorrow, right now with our
time and money, and in the future with the cost of services we will provide
instead of the government.
So for the government to turn around and see no value exchange is
outrageous. It's poor calculus, it's bad math, and
it's fiscal conservatism turning up in a
very dangerous place in society.
So I urge that this committee rejects
Clause 11,
and that this minister rearranges
their comprehension of the value parents of disabled dependents
offer this country before she rearranges their lives
again. Ngā mihi.
Thanks, Rob, for making the submission.
I acknowledge the clear emotion and obviously the
importance of this issue to you. The only thing I'd ask is,
objectively, this government has
significantly increased the funding to the greatest level of funding ever for the
disability support services, close to $3 billion now.
Do you think objectively that indicates that
it's doing what you're saying it's doing?
Yeah. Well, as a parent of a disabled person, I don't think I've felt the
center there.
Mm.
So,
you should stop talking about numbers
and start talking about policies and actions that your
government is taking.
So sure, it's a big number. You've probably got a headline for that.
Well done. But what has that
changed?
And what this legislation is changing is the
government's ability to act on disabled Kiwis'
rights without consultation.
Mm.
All right. No, thanks, Rob. I would rather appreciate making a submission this
afternoon.
Thank you.
Very well. All right, our next submitter is Debbie Hager by Zoom.
Kia ora.
Oh, good evening, Debbie, and welcome.
Thank you.
So we have five minutes with you this evening. The time is yours when ready.
I'm here today, and as a disabled person,
I've been a lecturer in public health for many years,
and for more than 20 years, I've been researching and working alongside other
disabled activists to raise awareness of violence against
disabled people. I have a handout that I hope
will be distributed to you while I'm talking, and it
summarizes again how this bill will
cause violence against disabled people.
And as a previous person said, I think this bill is dangerous.
You've been hearing from disabled people and people who love and care for their
families and whanau.
The people who harm disabled people are probably not submitting and
talking to you today.
I was thinking that if you had legislation that suggested
that all children
must live at home for their whole lives, and
be supported by their parents with no resources for autonomy,
with little choice in their lives and no way to escape violence,
that most people would be appalled and would never accept
that as a piece of legislation.
Yet somehow, that same thing seems to be
acceptable for disabled people.
And this is treating disabled people as not really adult,
and in fact, not really human.
When you do this, when you treat people as other,
or you treat people as less than, it
encourages and allows violence, abuse,
neglect, and exploitation to increase.
And you can see that when we treat people who are non-white as other,
that racial violence increases, gendered violence
increases, violence against children and the elderly.
And what's frightening about the violence that will happen to disabled people is
that it will be hidden in people's homes.
And this bill removes all
oversight of those people and any responsibility
for the outcomes of the bill and the harm that will be caused by it.
So we have systems in this country that acknowledge and address
other forms of violence. For example, violence against children, we have
Oranga Tamariki. Gendered violence, we
have the family violence legislation.
But for disabled people, there's no system to identify and respond to
violence.
So for disabled people, I feel,
and I agree with the previous speaker, and I said so in my submission,
with all of these changes that this coalition has made
to disabled people's
lives, to their access to resources, to
their ability to be autonomous by not having
more houses that are accessible, for example.
Rather than strengthening people's options and ability to live their
best life and the life that they choose, you are legislating for
lives without choice and the very high risk of
violence, exploitation, neglect, and abuse- And this
means not just that more people will suffer, but that more
disabled people will be killed.
So my suggestion for what to do is to reject this bill completely and
start again,
and develop a system with disabled people and their families
that values disabled people as people and enables
people to live autonomously and live fulfilling lives.
Human rights are for everyone, not just those who are privileged.
I hope you will recognize the immense harm that
not only this bill, but all of the changes have been made,
the immense harm will cause disabled
people, and will reject this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Debbie, any comments?
No. Thank you. You've made your points very clearly.
So, thank you for appearing and submitting to the committee this afternoon.
Thank you.
Our last but not least submitter is Antonia.
I've sent her-
Get Terry
... but we've got Terry online now.
Okay. All right. Let's try Terry.
He might, he might be able to go.
Excellent.
Yeah, Terry, if you can hear me, we're just waiting to see
and/or hear you.
Hmm. It's showing.
Mm-hmm.
So we can't currently hear you or see you, Terry.
If you can see me,
I'm not sure what's happening there with technology, but-
Did ring him but not sure.
Okay.
We've attempted to ring Antonia as well, but no luck.
Okay. Well,
we don't seem to be able to get Terry on the line,
so I think we-- or Antonia. So were you...
Those are our last two for the evening. All right, well, thank you everyone.
Close the, uh, discussions for this evening